4221. Depersonalization is defined as feelings of “unreality or detachment from, or unfamiliarity with, one’s whole self or from aspects of the self” (APA, 2013, p. 302). <START> Individuals who experience depersonalization might believe their thoughts and feelings are not their own; they may feel robotic as though they lack control over their movements and speech; they may experience a distorted sense of time and, in extreme cases, they may sense an “out-of-body” experience in which they see themselves from the vantage point of another person.<END>. Derealization is conceptualized as a sense of “unreality or detachment from, or unfamiliarity with, the world, be it individuals, inanimate objects, or all surroundings” (APA, 2013, p. 303). 


4224. <START>  Schizophrenia is a devastating psychological disorder that is characterized by major disturbances in thought, perception, emotion, and behavior.<END>. About 1% of the population experiences schizophrenia in their lifetime, and usually the disorder is first diagnosed during early adulthood (early to mid-20s). 


4227. A person with schizophrenia may believe that his mother is plotting with the FBI to poison his coffee, or that his neighbor is an enemy spy who wants to kill him. <START> These kinds of delusions are known as paranoid delusions, which involve the (false) belief that other people or agencies are plotting to harm the person.<END>. People with schizophrenia also may hold grandiose delusions, beliefs that one holds special power, unique knowledge, or is extremely important. 


4230. <START>  Disorganized thinking refers to disjointed and incoherent thought processes—usually detected by what a person says.<END>. The person might ramble, exhibit loose associations (jump from topic to topic), or talk in a way that is so disorganized and incomprehensible that it seems as though the person is randomly combining words. 


4233. <START>  Negative symptoms are those that reflect noticeable decreases and absences in certain behaviors, emotions, or drives (Green, 2001).<END>. A person who exhibits diminished emotional expression shows no emotion in his facial expressions, speech, or movements, even when such expressions are normal or expected. 


4236. <START>  Another variable that is linked to schizophrenia is marijuana use.<END>. Although a number of reports have shown that individuals with schizophrenia are more likely to use marijuana than are individuals without schizophrenia (Thornicroft, 1990), such investigations cannot determine if marijuana use leads to schizophrenia, or vice versa. 


4239. These experiences can include such events as combat, threatened or actual physical attack, sexual assault, natural disasters, terrorist attacks, and automobile accidents. <START> This criterion makes PTSD the only disorder listed in the DSM in which a cause (extreme trauma) is explicitly specified.Symptoms of PTSD include intrusive and distressing memories of the event, flashbacks (states that can last from a few seconds to several days, during which the individual relives the event and behaves as if the event were occurring at that moment [APA, 2013]), avoidance of stimuli connected to the event, persistently negative emotional states (e.g., fear, anger, guilt, and shame), feelings of detachment from others, irritability, proneness toward outbursts, and an exaggerated startle response (jumpiness).<END>. For PTSD to be diagnosed, these symptoms must occur for at least one month. 


4242. People with these disorders display a personality style that is odd or eccentric. <START> Cluster B disorders include antisocial personality disorder, histrionic personality disorder, narcissistic personality disorder, and borderline personality disorder.<END>. People with these disorders usually are impulsive, overly dramatic, highly emotional, and erratic. 


4245. <START>  According to the DSM-5, the individual with antisocial personality disorder (sometimes referred to as psychopathy) shows no regard at all for other people’s rights or feelings.<END>. This lack of regard is exhibited a number of ways and can include repeatedly performing illegal acts, lying to or conning others, impulsivity and recklessness, irritability and aggressiveness toward others, and failure to act in a responsible way (e.g., leaving debts unpaid) (APA, 2013). 


4248. <START>  Bipolar and related disorders are a group of disorders in which mania is the defining feature.<END>. Mania is a state of extreme elation and agitation. 


4251. suicidal ideation: thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), thinking about or planning suicide, or making an actual suicide attempt. 


4254. <START>  People with persistent depressive disorder (previously known as dysthymia) experience depressed moods most of the day nearly every day for at least two years, as well as at least two of the other symptoms of major depressive disorder.<END>. People with persistent depressive disorder are chronically sad and melancholy, but do not meet all the criteria for major depression. 


4257. During a manic episode, some experience a mood that is almost euphoric and become excessively talkative, sometimes spontaneously starting conversations with strangers; others become excessively irritable and complain or make hostile comments. <START> The person may talk loudly and rapidly, exhibiting flight of ideas, abruptly switching from one topic to another.<END>. These individuals are easily distracted, which can make a conversation very difficult. 


4260. <START>  Another cognitive theory of depression, hopelessness theory, postulates that a particular style of negative thinking leads to a sense of hopelessness, which then leads to depression (Abramson, Metalsky, & Alloy, 1989).<END>. According to this theory, hopelessness is an expectation that unpleasant outcomes will occur or that desired outcomes will not occur, and there is nothing one can do to prevent such outcomes. 


4263. One possible contributing factor in suicide is brain chemistry. <START> Contemporary neurological research shows that disturbances in the functioning of serotonin are linked to suicidal behavior (Pompili et al., 2010).<END>. Low levels of serotonin predict future suicide attempts and suicide completions, and low levels have been observed post-mortem among suicide victims (Mann, 2003). 


4266. Rather, obsessions are characterized as persistent, unintentional, and unwanted thoughts and urges that are highly intrusive, unpleasant, and distressing (APA, 2013). <START> Common obsessions include concerns about germs and contamination, doubts (“Did I turn the water off?”), order and symmetry (“I need all the spoons in the tray to be arranged a certain way”), and urges that are aggressive or lustful.<END>. Usually, the person knows that such thoughts and urges are irrational and thus tries to suppress or ignore them, but has an extremely difficult time doing so. 


4269. Although hoarding was traditionally considered to be a symptom of OCD, considerable evidence suggests that hoarding represents an entirely different disorder (Mataix-Cols et al., 2010). <START> People with hoarding disorder cannot bear to part with personal possessions, regardless of how valueless or useless these possessions are.<END>. As a result, these individuals accumulate excessive amounts of usually worthless items that clutter their living areas ([link]). 


4272. This woman likely would experience anxiety of greater intensity and duration than would a 21-year-old college junior who is having trouble finding a date for the annual social. <START> Some people, however, experience anxiety that is excessive, persistent, and greatly out of proportion to the actual threat; if one’s anxiety has a disruptive influence on one’s life, this is a strong indicator that the individual is experiencing an anxiety disorder.Anxiety disorders are characterized by excessive and persistent fear and anxiety, and by related disturbances in behavior (APA, 2013).<END>. Although anxiety is universally experienced, anxiety disorders cause considerable distress. 


4275. Rachman (1977) proposed that phobias can be acquired through three major learning pathways. <START> The first pathway is through classical conditioning.<END>. As you may recall, classical conditioning is a form of learning in which a previously neutral stimulus is paired with an unconditioned stimulus (UCS) that reflexively elicits an unconditioned response (UCR), eliciting the same response through its association with the unconditioned stimulus. 


4278. <START>  When people with social anxiety disorder are unable to avoid situations that provoke anxiety, they typically perform safety behaviors: mental or behavioral acts that reduce anxiety in social situations by reducing the chance of negative social outcomes.<END>. Safety behaviors include avoiding eye contact, rehearsing sentences before speaking, talking only briefly, and not talking about oneself (Alden & Bieling, 1998). 


4281. The exact genes and gene functions involved in this disorder, however, are not well-understood (APA, 2013). <START> Neurobiological theories of panic disorder suggest that a region of the brain called the locus coeruleus may play a role in this disorder.<END>. Located in the brainstem, the locus coeruleus is the brain’s major source of norepinephrine, a neurotransmitter that triggers the body’s fight-or-flight response. 


4284. For example, an individual may worry about her health and finances, the health of family members, the safety of her children, or minor matters (e.g., being late for an appointment) without having any legitimate reason for doing so (APA, 2013). <START> A diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder requires that the diffuse worrying and apprehension characteristic of this disorder—what Sigmund Freud referred to as free-floating anxiety—is not part of another disorder, occurs more days than not for at least six months, and is accompanied by any three of the following symptoms: restlessness, difficulty concentrating, being easily fatigued, muscle tension, irritability, and sleep difficulties.<END>. 


4287. Evidence from many sources indicates that most psychological disorders have a genetic component; in fact, there is little dispute that some disorders are largely due to genetic factors. <START> The graph in [link] shows heritability estimates for schizophrenia.<END>. 


4290. A psychological disorder is a condition characterized by abnormal thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. <START> Psychopathology is the study of psychological disorders, including their symptoms, etiology (i.e., their causes), and treatment.<END>. The term psychopathology can also refer to the manifestation of a psychological disorder. 


4293. No universal definition of psychological disorder exists that can apply to all situations in which a disorder is thought to be present (Zachar & Kendler, 2007). <START> However, one of the more influential conceptualizations was proposed by Wakefield (1992), who defined psychological disorder as a harmful dysfunction.<END>. Wakefield argued that natural internal mechanisms—that is, psychological processes honed by evolution, such as cognition, perception, and learning—have important functions, such as enabling us to experience the world the way others do and to engage in rational thought, problem solving, and communication. 


4296. <START>  THE DIAGNOSTIC AND STATISTICAL MANUAL OF MENTAL DISORDERS (DSM)Although a number of classification systems have been developed over time, the one that is used by most mental health professionals in the United States is the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), published by the American Psychiatric Association (2013).<END>. (Note that the American Psychiatric Association differs from the American Psychological Association; both are abbreviated APA.) 


4299. <START>  Trait theorists believe personality can be understood via the approach that all people have certain traits, or characteristic ways of behaving.<END>. Do you tend to be sociable or shy? 


4302. As you have learned in this chapter, personality is shaped by both genetic and environmental factors. <START> The culture in which you live is one of the most important environmental factors that shapes your personality (Triandis & Suh, 2002).<END>. The term culture refers to all of the beliefs, customs, art, and traditions of a particular society. 


4305. <START> One of the most widely used personality inventories is the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), first published in 1943, with 504 true/false questions, and updated to the MMPI-2 in 1989, with 567 questions.<END>. The original MMPI was based on a small, limited sample, composed mostly of Minnesota farmers and psychiatric patients; the revised inventory was based on a more representative, national sample to allow for better standardization. 


4308. <START> A second projective test is the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), created in the 1930s by Henry Murray, an American psychologist, and a psychoanalyst named Christiana Morgan.<END>. A person taking the TAT is shown 8–12 ambiguous pictures and is asked to tell a story about each picture. 


4311. The C-TCB contains 20 color images that show scenes of African-American lifestyles. <START> When the C-TCB was compared with the TAT for African Americans, it was found that use of the C-TCB led to increased story length, higher degrees of positive feelings, and stronger identification with the C-TCB (Hoy, 1997; Hoy-Watkins & Jenkins-Moore, 2008).The TEMAS Multicultural Thematic Apperception Test is another tool designed to be culturally relevant to minority groups, especially Hispanic youths.<END>. TEMAS—standing for “Tell Me a Story” but also a play on the Spanish word temas (themes)—uses images and storytelling cues that relate to minority culture (Constantino, 1982). 


